[Music]
genetics is a lot like a game of chance
there are 30 000 genes and 46
chromosomes you carry
and a combination of those determines
what you look like
but all of those genes come from your
family tree
and nowhere else so if you have light
hair
blue eyes and or a great singer while
your parents are dark-haired
brown-eyed and have no ear for music at
all
some of your ancestors must have had
those qualities too
anyway you inherit 23 chromosomes from
either of your parents
and then they start their interplay
think of it
as a sports competition whichever team
wins
determines the traits the child acquires
some of the players on one team are
inherently stronger than their opponents
they're called dominant genes their
counterparts on the other team
are recessive genes for example if the
mother has
hazel eyes that have passed down to
every member of her family
her gene responsible for the eye color
is dominant
that means her child will most likely
have hazel eyes too
but as in any competitive game both
teams have a chance to score so
if the father of that same child is
light-haired
in several generations his hair color
will probably be passed down to the baby
the match goes on like this until one
side wins
and that's how children end up looking
more like one of their parents
than the other but the rules of the game
aren't that short since both mother and
father
are also products of such a match their
genes
often get some help from their parents
and even grandparents
while competing with each other that's
why some traits
skip a generation or two if they didn't
appear in your child
it doesn't mean they won't be present in
your grandchildren
the balding pattern is one example of
this
let's say the men in your lineage tend
to lose hair in their 40s
but only in every other generation so
if your father despite being over 50 now
hasn't lost his hair and your
grandfather has
not a single strand on his head that
means
you're likely to follow in your
granddad's footsteps
unless you're born female of course then
lucky you
some jeans are cheaters though they're
stronger by default
curly hair and right handedness are just
a couple of examples
even if you're the only member of your
family tree
with brown eyes and curly hair there's a
high chance
you'll pass down those traits to your
kids that's especially true
if your partner has blue eyes and
straight hair
these traits are usually weaker
but even if both parents have a similar
complexion
build hair and eye color and share
everything else ancestors might still
make themselves known
in the offspring there are known cases
when two dark-skinned and black-haired
parents
had light-skinned and red-haired
children and vice versa
remember there are thirty thousand jeans
total
and their combinations are close to
infinite
some of those combinations can be
predicted with some certainty
apart from eye and hair color height is
one example
if both parents are tall the child is
likely to match their height
or even grow taller if there's a
difference
chances are the child will be somewhere
in the middle
hair and eyes also tend to become
lighter or darker with age
but that has nothing to do with genetics
people born with dark eyes
and very light hair might grow up to
have hazel eyes
and light brown hair in adulthood
melanin
is to blame for that the pigment
responsible for your skin
hair and eye color melanin production
is most active in childhood and slows
down as you grow up
that means you can even change your skin
tone with age
still brown eyes will never turn to blue
ones
and blonde hair won't ever become dark
that's
just too much of a shift there's also a
way to predict
eye color for instance if both parents
have the same color eyes
chances are high their child will have
the same color too
but in the case of brown and green eyes
that chance is lower
about 75 percent with blue eyes and both
parents
it's a 99 chance and they have next to
no
probability to have a dark-eyed baby
if one of the parents has brown dark
brown or hazel eyes
and the other has green gray or blue
it's almost like tossing a coin with the
darker eyes
having the upper hand a bit a couple
where one parent has green eyes
and the other blue has a 50 chance of
giving birth to a child
with either color of their eyes
and let's not forget other factors like
ethnicity
and even nutrition if your parents
weren't tall
but you're taller than both of them it
can be explained
by how you were fed while still growing
and what kind of sports you played
if any most basketball or volleyball
players
are much taller than average because of
their activity
some closed communities often share
traits common to those they live with
that could be anything from height to
build or facial complexion
it also often happens that couples from
different ethnic groups have children
with mixed
traits such kids get the best from both
of their parents
and can even have a skin color that's
different from either of them
[Music]
now let's play a little game and try to
find out what your future children might
look like
based on your genetics take a piece of
paper and a pen
to mark your and your partner's features
and check out the results at the end
disclaimer this test is no more than a
game so
please don't take it too seriously so
question one what color eyes do you and
your partner have
if they're different check both a
dark brown brown or hazel
b blue or gray c
green question two what color hair do
you and your partner have
a dark or light brown b
blonde c red
question three how would you describe
you and your partner's hair
a curly b straight
c wavy
question four what is the height
difference between you and your partner
a we're of the same or similar height
b one of us is much taller than the
other
[Music]
question five what skin tone do you
and your partner have a dark
e light question six
are either of you left handed a
no b yes one
or both of us are
[Music]
question seven does either of you have a
cleft chin
a yes one or both of us
b no okay
now to the answers first check how many
a's you have in your piece of paper even
if it's just
one of you who has this trait it's still
likely to be passed on to your future
child
all the a answers in this test are
dominant features
so if it's you who has them you know
what to look for in your future kid
if you have mostly bees or c's and it's
your partner who's genetically dominant
don't be upset either there's still a
chance to pass on your traits to
posterity
no gene combination is guaranteed
if you both have most liais then it's a
perfect harmony
a brown-eyed right-handed dark and
curly-haired couple with a dark skin
tone
and a cleft chin have a high chance to
receive their little copy
when they're born same goes for when you
both have b's or c's in your answer
sheet
since none of these traits are dominant
you're very likely to have a child who
resembles both of you
now if you want an even more precise
guess
go take a look at your family albums
take note
of all the features you see in your
relatives even your aunts
uncles and cousins does auntie jenny
have gray eyes
despite everyone else having brown ones
did grandpa will have cute dimples on
his cheeks
is this red hair you see on your great
uncle's head
any of these features have a chance of
appearing in your future kid
so just you wait and see